diplomats invoke a rarely used
resolution at the UN General Assembly to
try to stop Israel's war on Gaza after
the United States vetoed a security
Council attempt to call for a ceasefire
is the veto power paralyzing the UN
should it be permanently revoked this is
Inside
Story
[Music]
hello and welcome to the program I'm
serl Vanier the emergency session of the
United Nations General Assembly is
bringing Israeli massacres in Gaza into
sharp Global Focus after more than nine
weeks of violence the UN Security
Council has been unable to agree on a
ceasefire warning of a global threat un
Secretary General Antonio Gutierrez
invoked a rarely used article last week
to urge the security Council to act but
despite an overwhelming majority voting
in favor of a ceasefire the US blocked
it using its veto power critics say this
absolute power of the five permanent
members of the security Council renders
the world body helpless at a time when
Global conflicts demand timely Solutions
so is it time for The veto power to be
removed will it help the UN become more
effective we'll discuss these issues in
detail with our guests shortly but first
this report by Finton Monahan
un diplomats get a closer look at the
war in Gaza the Rafa Crossing is the
only entry point for humanitarian Aid
into the territory nowhere near enough
is coming in and most Palestinians are
prevented from leaving when they see it
nice when you visit the hospital when
you when you see how the humanitarian
assistance is being is being uh
basically basically prohibited to enter
to enter Gaza despite despite the
catastrophic situation Di situation this
is uh really uh a
tragedy and it has been too long we have
uh suffered too much so for the security
Council definitely to maintain peace and
security is our primary
responsibility and uh we have tried very
hard and of course we we need to do more
the visit was aimed at building
International consensus on the need for
a ceasefire last week resolution was
tabled at the UN Security Council but
was vetoed by the United States the UN
Secretary General said he continue to
press the issue regrettably the security
Council failed to do it but that does
not make it less
necessary so I can promise I will not
give up of civilians and upholding
there's been more success at the general
assembly where every state has a vote
and no one has veto right
on October the 27th it passed a
resolution calling for a humanitarian
pause but UN General Assembly
resolutions aren't
binding when the UN was founded in 1945
the charter gave special powers to five
permanent Security Council Members the
US the UK France Russia and China each
has a veto and has used it extensively
over the years the US has blocked more
than 40 resolutions on
Israel critics say the current setup
isn't working as the International
Community is unable to respond
effectively to Global
crises there's been many proposals for
reform including limiting The veto and
expanding the number of permanent
members on the UN Security Council not
one has been implemented
concerned Israel's bombing campaign has
killed or injured tens of thousands of
Palestinians most of gaza's population
has been forcibly displaced many
families several times Israel has
rejected calls for permanent ceasefire
as pledged to continue its assault
despite growing appeals for an end to
the violence Finton Mahan Al jazer for
Inside
Story let's bring in our guests in
Northern Wales is Khan Ross the founder
of Independent Diplomat and nonprofit
Advisory Group he's also a former
British Diplomat who served on the UN
Security Council in Islamabad Mala Loi
is a for former Pakistani ambassador to
the United Nations and was closely
involved in discussions about the reform
of the security Council in Moscow now is
vaslav matusa former Russian Diplomat
chairman of the Russian friendship
society with Arab countries welcome to
you all Khan first question to you
18,000 Palestinians have been killed
most of them women and children and the
UN Security Council is not able to call
for a ceasefire even though most of the
world wants to see the fighting stop is
the UN failing at its primary
Mission yes undoubtedly I mean the UN
Security Council is the world's primary
body for peace and security for peace
and security and the US has blocked any
action as it has traditionally done on
Israel Palestine issues and on this
occasion it has clearly blocked Security
Council action so now the action goes to
the general
assembly so by the way just to make this
clear at the time of recording we
haven't yet seen the vote of the UN
General Assembly it'll happen in a few
hours um there is likely to be
overwhelming support for pausing the
fighting um and it's probably going to
be called a ceasefire in the language
that they're looking at Mal Malo we have
we have many viewers from what could be
called the global South on Al jazer what
are they supposed to think when they see
major powers on the one hand promoting
International rules and then blocking
the only mul multilateral system that we
have to uphold them when it suits their
interests well I think most people in
the global South would be extremely
disappointed but not surprised by the
way that the security Council the way
it's structured uh is is not working uh
I think at the heart of its dysfunction
lies the fact that we have a structure
of the primary body responsible for the
maintenance of International Peace and
security uh which reflects an
arrangement of a bygone error uh I mean
the five permanent members are there
because of uh the second world war
Arrangement and now the security Council
needs to reflect current day Global
realities which it doesn't so I think
there's disappointment in the global
South but there's also a sense that this
body must be radically reformed if it is
to live up to the responsibilities of
the 21st century because it does not
reflect 21st century realities and for
that it is important that either the the
Security Council is reformed in a manner
that you increase uh the number of
elected members who can then balance the
power exercise by the P5 uh or you move
to end the veto wielding uh pa uh even
though I think that will be a very
difficult difficult thing to do because
any reform of the security Council with
which you know I have been involved in
the negotiation for almost 5 years uh
any reform would involve an amendment to
the Charter of the United Nations and
that means that a two-thirds majority of
the general assembly will be required
and then ratification by all those who
have voted for it including the five
permanent members so here's the Dilemma
or the problem the problem is that the
five permanent members of the security
Council do not wish to give up its veto
and therefore we're looking at a
situation where they have been recently
moves by the general assembly to try to
at least limit or to embarrass uh the
permanent five when they use the veto
and I think we should remember the
countries that have used it most uh it
is the United States and Russia uh the
United Kingdom is the number three
country that's used The veto uh many
times but China and France have used it
less so the two countries that have used
it most uh you know that underlines the
fact how they've either tried to Shield
themselves or their allies from censure
or from any kind of action which leaves
the security Council dysfunctional
ineffective and lacking
legitimacy okay vaslav I want to bring
you into this conversation but before I
do that quick little explanation to make
sure all our viewers are up to speed on
just the very basics of how the UN
Security Council works the UN Security
Council or UNC is 15 members five of
which are permanent and they are
essentially the victors of World War II
which is when all of this was designed
and and built and they are the US the UK
Russia China and France and those five
only have the right and the ability to
veto any resolution that comes to them
okay and that's what we're talking about
today so vaslav I I want your take on
this as a former Russian Diplomat
because on this particular conflict the
war on Gaza countries have been critical
of the US vetoing a ceasefire but
there's another conflict going on still
going on of course Russia and Ukraine
and on that conflict it's been the other
way around with Russia uh vetoing any
attempts to impose a ceasefire in that
war so we see that the major Powers use
the veto when it suits their interests
what is your take on this this issue of
the veto power and whether it's blocking
the
UN of course uh if we'll have a look at
the current International Affairs we'll
found out that
un organization was established after as
a result of second world war there
pragmatically speaking it was two powers
that splited and support and there in in
one against the Germany United States
and Soviet Union it was 80 years ago and
now we facing other things that to
big Powers America and Russia who replac
the Soviet Union split absolutely
different positions and now if you have
a look at their situation in Syria where
uh uh uh Russian troops facing uh
American troops in their Resort in uh on
the borders of the jordania Jordan and
uh also on Ukraine where they are
fighting and the Russian view on what
situation in Ukraine is Russia is
fighting not Ukraine
Ukrainian military forces that's right
well but the for these forces are
supported fully question is about the my
question is about veto power in the UN
V uh VTO power it is necessary thing
what agreed on in the 80 years ago it
was a a a a compromise to find a
compromise to satisfy United States and
Soviet
Union now where the Russian Federation
is in the state of war against the
United States to find a compromise and a
common solution it's not it's very
difficult if you look at details on any
conflict not only in Gaza why remind you
2006 the situation in Lebanon when
Israeli Army two mons was bombarding
their own alleys in Lebanon Christian
Maronite uh militia uh who was destroyed
by Israel strikes uh rocket stries
bombing and why because
calar that time said
the in Lebanon we are creating a new big
Middle East wa the question I really
want to answer to is how the works works
or doesn't work plan plan that is
conflicted conflicted with the situation
in United Nation in Security Council of
course two different position they
cannot two main powers didn't have
opportunity to find a solution common
solution because America consider Russia
lost Russia Soviet Union lost Russia is
weak country we can't take into
consideration their uh desire their
plans their position and only the United
States can dominate well now we have a
plan a plan on Gaza on
Israel plan it is called deal of century
it is signed by uh as we said all
discussed by if you don't mind I'm going
to have to jump in because I really want
I'll have to jump in because I really
want to keep it about about the UN
mechanism right now for preventing
conflict and keeping the peace that's
really our Focus today KH we just heard
two different positions one essentially
saying we need to the UN needs to be
more inclusive in its decision making
and that means perhaps get rid of the
veto or widen The veto power and another
vaslav saying veto is necessary because
it's a compromise between uh the major
Powers now you were a British Diplomat
and you resigned this is interesting
from the foreign office after the Iraq
War that's when you founded your
advisory group independent Diplomat
Diplomat because you figured that there
was a democratic deficit your words tell
us about that and how that applies
today well it applies because um many
many smaller countries and non-state
groups many of whom are involved in
conflicts or disputes around the world
are not entitled to speak at the UN
Security Council or indeed other un
bodies when their issue is on the table
so independent Diplomat was founded to
address that problem by giving smaller
groups Democratic groups only Democratic
groups the tools The Diplomatic means to
get at those Security Council Members or
general assembly members in other ways
for instance by organizing private
inform
meetings but the the the the the earlier
speaker who talked about the Democratic
legitimacy of the security Council was
absolutely right it's not a legitimate
body in that its membership is not
representative but the Paradox is you
make it larger and perhaps expand extend
the use of the veto to other new
permanent members and that will make it
even harder for the security Council to
reach agreement and one of the paradoxes
of what your Russian contributor said is
that the veto isn't indeed in some ways
necessary because it forces the big
powers to agree or not to agree to a
particular resolution if they don't vote
for a resolution and they can't veto it
they may well say well why should we
implement it or why should Israel
implement it in the case of Gaza because
we haven't voted for it and that's a
paradox of the veto in in a sense that
it forces the big countries to adere to
the rules agreed by the security Council
or not so in your view should veto power
be retained and perhaps modified or
should be
scrapped I think it should be modified I
think there should be consensus in the
general assembly to limit the use of the
veto so lonstein the little state
lonstein has proposed a reform whereby
The veto could not be used in the case
of mass atrocity or war crimes and I
think that's a very sensible reforms and
reform and many other countries would
support that and I think I think that's
reasonable the other reform is that
Security Council memb permanent members
should be obliged to explain themselves
to the general assembly when they use
the veto when the general assembly might
then take up the issue as they have done
on Palestine
today Mala do we still live in a
rules-based
order if the majority will of of the
majority of countries in the world as
it's been expressed by the general
assembly is blocked by just a handful of
countries can be blocked by a handful of
countries well of course the answer is
no we do not live in a rules based
International order but I do want to
address something that you talked about
earlier which is uh the idea that
expanding VTO wielding Powers will
somehow help the security Council I
didn't at all uh mean that I meant one
way that the security Council can be
reformed to be more representative more
accountable and more current uh to
reflect uh today's realities is for it
to expand by adding elected members and
the idea would be that that would help
to balance the power of the P5 because
the P5 are not going anywhere for now if
they're not going anywhere for now then
of course the answer also lies uh in
initiatives that have been taken for
example there's a French Mexican
initiative to try to limit the use of
the veto so that it is not uh used in
cases of mass atrocities and then
there's also a European uh ini
initiative some years ago uh which aims
to limit the use of the veto uh in cases
where there is a humanitarian uh
situation but these initiatives are
there there's growing support for them
uh amongst members of the general
assembly uh but clearly they haven't
been able to uh achieve their objective
because they have not been implemented
they've not been agreed
to what's the what's the most realistic
Plan B at this stage there have been
many avenues for reform that have been
proposed that have been considered in
various forums what's the most realistic
Plan B well I think it's hard for a
realistic Plan B to come into play until
the P5 themselves agree and I think that
is what lies at the heart of the problem
uh I mean the problem and the solution
are the same uh the problem is the P5
with their vetos but the solution also
lies in them voluntarily giving up uh or
at least limiting the use of the veto
but we don't see that happening so I
think the general assembly membership
has tried to counter that by initiatives
like uh ensuring that the use of the
veto is explained to the general
assembly I mean this happened last year
through a resolution that was adopted uh
by the general assembly uh and of course
uh this led to an open debate uh in
April this year by the general assembly
of the use of the veto uh which was the
first time that a major debate took
place plus don't forget that over two
decades of negotiations in what is
called the intergovernmental uh
negotiating process at the United
Nations in the general assembly has not
produced any outcome but what it has
done is to highlight the need for reform
of the security Council and the need for
accountability by the P5 to the general
assembly which after all is the
parliament of the world well speaking of
parliament of the world it's interesting
you say that um and I'll come to you
with this next question I want to Pivot
to resolution 377 because um in the
absence of a resolution two days ago uh
by the UN Security Council the general
assembly said okay well we're going to
invoke this this rule that we don't use
very often which essentially gives us
expanded Powers um the primary purpose
of the United Nations is to keep the
peace the UN Security Council is not
calling for a ceasefire so we're going
to try and do this it's our turn and by
the way the general assembly represents
the will of almost every country in the
world right it's 193 countries if I'm
not mistaken that the general assembly
however
however what they pass is nonbinding
unlike the resolutions of the security
Council so my question to you vaslav is
this just a pressure tool then a
pressure tool in this case aimed at
applying pressure on the
US well my private opinion that there is
pressure on us of course it's very
important because previous the voting
for previous project of resolution in
Security Council only the United States
and Israel supported
pragmatically uh opposed pragmatically
uh ceas fire
resolution I think that even the United
Nation General Assembly adopt to 90
person of voices for to support
Palestinian and demanding stop
killing who is fulfill this decision
General Assembly Security Council uh uh
Israel only
been today I believe that United States
are embarrassed with the situation in
Gaza is trying to prove to uh to
influence on Ben mean nany and Israel to
change their attitude and to stop uh
bombing to stop killing people but who
is taking decision real decision on the
ground bamin nanyu if he refus to do
what it will be uh measures against him
if security ccil is ready to undertake
any real steps to to impose
their decision to those who doesn't
fulfill it well America as it obviously
today is choosing other way she is not
opposing desire bamin nanyu why because
there is a plan plan of deal of century
that I mentioned that means that no
Palestinian no Arab on Israeli territory
all of them should be outside the
territory why they blaming now Egypt why
they blaming now Jordan who don't accept
refugees because they're understanding
very clearly examples from the previous
decades when they Liv in their houses
they Liv in their territory they live in
their soil they became refugees outside
the country and the plan of century deal
of century is consist to to create a new
situation inside Israel without any
conflict confrontation with local people
Palestinians I think that this plan of
New Frontiers of uh uh uh in the Middle
East it could also we can mention the
situation in Syria in Turkey in if you
allow me to jump in respectfully
creation
of you mentioned G state if I can if I
can jump in you've mentioned the deal of
the century multiple times so that was
the nickname given to um what the Trump
administration had proposed to the
Israelis and the Palestinians it's not
active in any way under the Biden
Administration um however Biden has
addressed this this is how Biden
acknowledged the importance just
recently uh of global public opinion
this is what he had to say
we continue to provide military
assistance until they get rid of
[Applause]
Hamas but but we have to be careful they
have to be careful the whole world's
public opinion can shift overnight we
can't let that happen we're working
relentlessly for the safe return of the
hostages soan you heard that the whole
world's opinion can shift overnight
until now the US has had seemed fairly
impervious to uh to pressure from other
countries this is one of those little
data points if you're reading the
situation carefully that suggests maybe
maybe actually they they are taking this
into account oh they certainly are and
they always have been even if they may
not acknowledge so in public of course
countries even ones as powerful and as
dominant as the United States care a
great deal about the what what the rest
of international what the rest of the
International Community think about
their actions and they will be feeling
very exposed they don't like uh wielding
The veto in the UN Security Council it
makes them look very isolated the vote
in the general assembly will demonstrate
the same thing that there is a large
majority of countries in the world who
want to cease fire and only the US and
Israel and a few allies oppose it and
that's not a comfortable position for
the us to be in and likewise Israel
Israel says it doesn't care about
International Comm International opinion
or the views of the but it actually does
and this will exert a certain kind of
pressure on them on the US and Israel to
ultimately stop military action in Gaza
I don't think it will be a military
imperative that stops the action in Gaza
whatever the Israelis say about it I
think it will be external diplomatic
pressure Mala do you think then that
there is a breaking point so to speak
for the us where the international
pressure becomes such that the US stops
using for instance its veto power power
and shielding Israel from a from a un
Security Council call for a
ceasefire well if it uh was there it
should have happened by now uh look at
the scale of the killings in Gaza look
at the number of children uh who've been
killed look at the terrible uh Calamity
that has befallen uh Gaza uh Global
opinion is very clear Global opinion has
been expressed in the previous UN
General Assembly resolution it has been
expressed in demonstrations that are
taking place across the world and yet
the United States seems to not be
responding to this there's a disconnect
between what it says and what it does
it's not new uh we've seen it happen
before also but the tragedy is that by
the time the United States realizes it
what will be left in Gaza uh the death
and destruction there uh and the fact
that the United States continues uh to
provide Israel with weapons and
high-tech weapons at that while saying
that it wants to protect civilians in
Gaza I mean you cannot get a more bigger
disconnect uh than that so unfortunately
these double standards and the hypocrisy
uh of the US position is something that
is being noted across the world and
there will be a diplomatic cost for the
United States but for now it seems to be
impervious uh to Global opinion and
that's all the time we have for today
but I'd like to thank all our guests con
Ross malod and veslav matusof for taking
the time to have this conversation today
and thank you too for watching you can
see the program again anytime by
visiting our website aljaz docomo do go
to our Facebook page that's
facebook.com AJ insidestory you can also
join the conversation on X our handle
there is AJ insid story from me Sarah
vaner and the whole team here in Doha
bye for
now